---
id: P_0048
---
# Drawing Draws Time
## Gregor Stemmrich
 
The words that describe the traditional visual arts—drawing, paint- ing, sculpture, architecture — refer to material processes that were seen as constitutive of these arts: setting down signs or drawing lines, grinding pigments and covering a surface with them, cutting into a material or carving elements out of a block, building up and forming a mass from a moldable, coherent material; only the word architecture does not refer solely to a procedure but above all to a status. the word is derived from arché (beginning, origin, foundation, first) and techné (art, craft), so that it could be translated as ›first art‹ or ›first craft‹ and at the same time be understood as the building of a foundation. the label thus refers to an idea of order. this idea, however, should not be sought in an abstract schema, in a hierarchy, or in a basic metaphysical assumption but rather in a basic human need: the need to have protection and arrange for such protection. seen in this way, architecture is a necessity: but it is the necessity to create a reality that at the same provides possible space within which the other arts can move, for it can only be considered the ›first art‹ in relation to other arts. therein lies the idea of making it possible to deal freely with needs—that is to say, to create and maintain the possibility of producing needs and intellectual interests along with the possibility to satisfy them. what we experience as aesthetic can be understood as a sensory idea of this sort of harmonious relationship. through it we are in a position to come to an understanding about ourselves. yet such an under- standing in art is not in the nature of an »elevated conversation of minds« but remains tied to the experience of a materiality. the material procedures to which the names of the traditional arts refer relate precisely to such experience. it seems almost paradoxical that architecture, the very art that usually requires the most massive use of materials, bears a designation as the ›first art‹ that scarcely reflects that fact. 

Of all the visual arts drawing has traditionally been considered the one that gets by with the least expenditure of materials. it has therefore been said to have a particular affinity to mental process- es. in the classical theory of disegno apostrophizing drawing ne- cessiatted a distinction between disegno esterno and disegno interno: although external drawing was also determined materially, it could and should nevertheless be considered a manifestation of a purely mental process. the thematic connection to the inner, the mental, the conceptual seemed indispensable to characterizing drawing as the original mode of design; and to the extent that all art is based on design, drawing as concetto could also be considered the ›first art.‹ nevertheless, this way of looking at things did not emphasize drawing as a material product and autonomous artifact but rather as an intellectual basis for all art. 

Consequently as a result of the tradition we feel obliged to postulate an opposition of the material and the mental. even if we no longer take the traditional idea of a ›system of the arts› as our start- ing point, and even if we consider obsolete the modernist notion that every art can define itself autonomously in a way specific to its medium, this opposition remains as a basic disposition of a theoretical understanding of art. the latter, however, is contradicted by the findings of aesthetic experience in that such experience resists being split into material and mental constituents. it is therefore of- ten idealistically declared to be a manifestation of a reconciliation of opposites. because aesthetic signs have the de facto character of a pure postulate, however, we encounter therein an impenetrable materiality and at the same time the effect of a freedom that evades our knowledge. the special proximity that the aesthetic has to our capabilities of sensory and mental perception is countered by a special distance that affects the conditions of its existence. out of this tension result two perspectives for reception that relate to each other but never coincide. on the one hand, the aesthetic artifact provides an occasion to be on the lookout for significant correspondences everywhere, both internally (in its own structure and orientation) and externally (in relationship to realities that seem to be evoked in it). it offers itself to understanding in the spirit of this kind of transparency of phenomena that are brought to bear in the correspondences perceived. the meaning that is grasped in such an understanding is not simply posited but rather results from being a composite. the recipients can thus be guided by their nor- mal processes of comprehension in their usual relationships to themselves and the world and yet also remain caught up therein. on the other hand, if it is thematized that aesthetic signs are merely posited, it also entails a distancing from their usual understanding of the world and themselves. this distancing causes the aesthetic signs to fall back on their mere being thus, on a materiality that resists all suspicions of meaning but whose distinctiveness is nonetheless manifested aesthetically. in the process it becomes possible to experience the freedom that arrests, breaks open, and transcends ordinary forms of imagination. something that seems, on the one hand (i.e., phenomenally), a loss of meaning itself obtains meaning as such, on the other hand (i.e., transcendentally), in terms of possibilities of orientation and reorientation. although these two perspectives of reception cannot coincide, neither can they be conceived independently of each other. rather, aesthetic experience entails their reflexive interlocking. it collects the recipients in their usual understanding of themselves and the world only to expect of them the freedom to transcend this usual understand- ing of themselves and the world. 

Although these observations are formulated very generally in their polarizing tendency, they reveal an orientation that can lead to asking how it is possible to think of architecture and drawing together as the ›first art‹ (techné), and how drawing and architecture are at the same posited for themselves in their various material dispositions. They are posited for themselves only when the one praxis is not posited to be serving the other. for example, although drawing is the medium of designing and planning for the architect, such designing and planning does not occur for its own sake but with a functional view to a possible building or ensemble of buildings, roads and green spaces, which are in turn considered from functional perspectives. although such designs have an eminently aesthetic character, the aesthetic is not posited for itself but is in- stead evident as a function that is necessarily related to other practical functions. only when architecture is understood as a frame- work and latitude which makes it possible to realize design by drawing for the sake of drawing but related to architecture, without encroaching on architecture itself (architectonically), is the unique relationship of tension between the two ›first arts‹ brought to bear in a way in which each of these forms of aesthetic praxis is posit- ed for itself. 

at the same time this brings us to a point at which drawing can overstep the traditional boundaries of the genre without stepping outside of the relationship of tension described here. that is to say, drawing can become an aesthetic praxis that takes on the character of an installation, revealing affinities to sculpture or painting without being classified as one of these arts. for sculptural elements can be kept so planar that they still function like drawings, since they neither appear in relief, which would presume a plastic connection with the wall, nor stand freely in the space. likewise, these elements can reveal an affinity to painting in their color- fulness without therefore being considered painting, since they are neither painterly visual signs nor elements to convey such visual signs. thus ›drawing‹ remains the most obvious name for it, in part because that which can be characterized more specifically as ›wall drawing‹ or ›wall-related installation‹ is indeed a derivation based on the architectonic situation from drawings that are developed in a conventional format on paper. 

The works we have in mind here are those presented by Sandra Peters in the exhibition Zeichnung Heute (Drawing Today) at the Kunstmuseum Bonn. they include a group of drawings that can be further divided into subgroups and one large mural work that is obviously related to them. Each of the drawings is autonomous—that is to say, the fact that various drawings can be grouped according to shared characteristics does not mean that these are self-contained cycles that can only be assessed as a whole. on the contra- ry, compilations of drawings from different groups or subgroups can be just as plausible and appealing aesthetically as a compilation that simply emphasizes shared characteristics. such openness in the organization of possible compilations of different drawings thus proves to be a general characteristic of these drawings that pertains both to their internal structure and to their potential to be converted into large mural works or installations. that which can be said of possible compilations of various drawings into large or small groups also pertains to the circumstance that each of the drawings consists of compilations of several components, which can vary considerably in number, into an open association that is tempting to call fluid. and it is precisely this circumstance that can find its most enduring significance and its completely developed potential in wall installations in which the components obtain a separate material presence without forfeiting the impression they exist in a fluid equilibrium. Sandra Peters’s art invites us to see it in a way in which the determinations of whole and part vary, turning into each other and changing. something that appears as a part can also be viewed as a whole, and the whole can be seen as part of an open ensemble. 

It is, however, important to keep in mind the interplay of formal and material points of view. for example, the part and the whole can easily be understood as purely formal determinations, but that would mean leaving something out of the account. differentiating something formally makes it possible to view it as a part or as a whole, depending on whether it is seen in relation to other parts or for itself. yet this ›something‹ inalienably has a material determination that cannot be understood solely or decisively from its form. this may become clearer by examining specific cases. in several works Sandra Peters sketches on tracing paper, but she not only employs it as the material support for possible postulates of signs but also cuts forms out of the paper. the cutout form is thus visible as form, but it refers to the tracing paper as a material in which it is materialized as empty form by giving this material itself a kind of drawing-like meaning. here we relate our idea of the whole not primarily to the form but to the material, to the sheet of tracing paper whose homogeneity is interrupted by the cutout form. at the same time the ›whole‹ sheet itself can be seen as merely an arbitrarily determined part of a larger (virtually unlimited) sheet. the formal relationship of whole and part thus dovetails with the positive and negative determinations of the material. the form thus obtains its intelligibility from the perspective of material determinations and vice versa.

this way of looking at things can be also be applied to some of Sandra Peters’s other aesthetic decisions; for example, to the fact that in many of the drawings in the exhibition she combines two drawings on tracing paper in such a way that one drawing is on the front and the other on the back of the tracing paper or such that two separate sheets of tracing paper with two corresponding, inversely correlated drawings are superimposed, causing one draw- ing to shine through the other. hence there are scarcely any limits on the possible combinations and correlations. the meaning of these various measures, however, lies in the mutual emphasis of the formal and material aspects: the same drawing that seems sharply contoured on the front of the tracing paper seems strange- ly amorphously, diffusely, and virtually dissolved in the domain of a specific materiality when presented from behind or when shining through another sheet of tracing paper. 
such works contrast with other drawings that at first glance seem to invite the opposite conclusion: for example, the drawings that Sandra Peter does on graph paper. yet in Sandra Peters’s drawings even graph paper is a material becomes intelligible precisely because the curving forms and configurations that spread out on it are by no means arranged according to the strictly orthogonal pat- terns of lines, even though their color takes up the reddish hue of the paper along with the grid structure drawn on it. something that at first glance seems to be determined purely by form — that is, the grid structure — thus obtains an aesthetic significance as material. in this way we become conscious of the fact that the usual distinctions of form and material can be inverted when considered aesthetically. because everything that people need can be understood as material, forms can also be seen as material; at the same time we see that every material we encounter has some formal determinations. thus forms can recede into mere materiality, so to speak, only to emphasize it aesthetically as materiality. an open realm of design and related changing dispositions of perception is constituted in the process. 

the first and most lasting impression of Sandra Peters’s drawings in the exhibition is of a certain vocabulary of flexibly curving forms that cannot be clearly pinned down but rather gives a direction in which the forms and their configurations can be developed and varied. when seen as a vocabulary, these forms are materials with which the artist works. when seen in terms of their potential for development and internal variation, however, a temporal dimension is also revealed. this is the source of the impression of a fluid equilibrium, of a living stasis within a temporal flow that does not pull the elements along with it but rather gives them an aesthetic insistence. everything that appears, appears in time, yet aesthetic phenomena can put their own phenomenality in such a light that out understanding of time is directly affected by it. that which appears in time in this way causes time itself to be manifested where the phenomenal touches on the transcendental. 
hence it comes as no surprise to learn that Sandra Peters plans to create large murals with lineaments of neon lamps based on her drawings. for neon light is a material that refers per se to the temporality of a flow of energy in which and as which it achieves aesthetic intensity. that, however, seems significant above all because it corresponds extremely closely to something that is already inherent and addressed in the fluid equilibrium of the lineaments of her drawings. it is, however, also possible that she will relate this fluid equilibrium to the architectural space in a configuration of separate color panels in various curved forms. for her drawings contain no directives for their own transfer to the architectonic scale; rather, it is the specific prevailing circumstances of the exhibition situation that influence Sandra Peters’s decisions about how to realize the drawing in relation to the architecture. 