---
title: W_0055
---
I conceived the sculpture Interface No.1 for the Mathematical Institute at the University of Oxford. To be installed in the new building designed by Rafael Viñoly and inaugurated in 2013, it was to integrate references to Viñoly’s architecture as well as surrounding structures such as the Radcliffe Observatory. Each of these buildings is based on simple modular elements: stones laid atop one another in the older buildings, abutting stone tiles in the floors of the lobby inside and plaza around the Mathematical Institute, and square glass panes composing the observatory’s windows. Conjoined in complex larger structures, they would be perceived as units or bodies.

The sculpture Interface No. 1 engages all these buildings in dialogue. Composed of rods, the faces of the cube, considered individually, are flat panels evincing a basic organization. Assembled to form a cube, however, the six panels yield a complex structure that, though seemingly static, is lent a dynamic aspect by the bilateral-diagonal axis. The viewer can peer through the sculpture; meanwhile, its interior takes shape as a space unto itself with a distinctive presence. The cube’s transparency emulates the institute’s light-filled lobby, while the sculpture, with its open-work faces, makes “eye contact” through the institute’s glazed entrance with the Radcliffe Observatory’s delicate window structure. 

The ideal place for the sculpture would be in the lobby, just to the right of the entrance: without obstructing the main flow of visitors in and out of the building, it would integrate itself into the overall situation in the lobby, inserting itself into various visual axes.
