---
title: W_0024
---
For the new headquarters of the Federal Intelligence Service (BND) on Berlin’s Chausseestraße, I created four similar but not identical sculptural objects. With shapes rounded on all sides, they bring to mind boulders. Yet this impression is at odds with their size, materiality, and appearance: they are made of steel and coated with translucent paint.

The objects are intended for four square platforms that bound the complex’s terrace facing the Pankepark greenspace. They are prominently visible from inside the building as hollow bodies whose shells reflect the surroundings. Each of the four objects is slightly displaced from the center of its platform’s surface, engendering a rhythmical tension between them, a lineament that disrupts the perfect symmetry of the terrace and the building as a whole. In this way, the objects’ shapes and arrangement act as a counterpoint to the rigid geometry of the architecture, while retaining a correspondence with the facade, to which the use of light-colored natural stone and champagne anodized aluminum lends an unexpected flow.

Despite their dimensions (height ca. 450 cm each, lengths between 7 and 9 m), the objects touch their bases only in minimal footprints. My objective is to hone a sense for the interplay of surfaces, volumes, and space and strike a fragile equilibrium between them, achieving a situation of harmony and equipollence between architecture, art, and the surroundings, with dimensions that are congruous with the human body. 
