---
title: W_0103-0108
---
In 2015, I began work on a series of drawings based on the eleven nets of the cube. Then, for my 2016 exhibition Pandora’s Box at New York University Abu Dhabi’s Project Space, I realized Untitled (Wall Drawing), in which one of these eleven nets serves as the basic form on which all eleven nets, drawn on a smaller scale, are placed without touching at either edges or vertices. An 11 × 11 grid underlies each square face of the basic form, and a 2 × 2 grid underlies each such face of the nets placed on it. Some of the nets are truncated because they extend beyond the outline of the basic form. However, when the viewer folds up the latter into a cube before the mind’s eye, he or she “sees” that the truncated forms meet at the appropriate edges and form complete nets.

In 2017, six of them were printed on glass using the silkscreen process. The series bears the title Untitled 1–6 (Slight Squint). It is printed in yellow ink on the glass pane. Overlaid on it on the other, obverse side of the glass are arrangements of the eleven nets of the cube in silver; the translucent materiality of the glass forms a gap between the printed layers and heightens the impression that the silver forms hover just above the basic yellow form. The latter is placed such that it not only suggests a staircase but, due to its position relative to the edges of the pane, also appears to be ascending. The silver forms, too, seem to be rising in, with, and over the basic form. Certain lighting conditions reinforce this impression, especially when the silver forms near the top right corner appear brighter than those in the bottom left part of the stepped basic form.
